I was born in 14 March 1879 in Ulm, Germany.
I died in 18 April 1955 in Princeton.
My nationality is german.
I was a theoretical physicist.
My greatest achievement was the theory of relativity.
I discovered the mass–energy equivalence formula E = mc^2.
I received a Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for my services to theoretical physics, and especially for my discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect.
I got my Ph.D. at University of Zurich.
I was married to Mileva Maric and Elsa Löwenthal.
I had three children.
My fields of study were physics and phylosophy.
Right now I am dead.
Elsa was my wife and my cousin.
I was a full professor at the German Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague.
I got an American citizenship in 1940.
All crazy scientists in movies portray me.
The world's most famous equation E = mc^2.
My name is Albert Einstein.
At the present I am working on extending relativity.
Newtoniam mechanics ar no longer sufficient to enough to reconcile the laws of classical mechanics with the laws of the electromagnetic field
I developed my special theory of relativity at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern (1902–1909), Switzerland.
I published a paper on general relativity in 1916.
I dealt with problems of statistical mechanics and quantum theory.
I also investigated the thermal properties of light which laid the foundation of the photon theory of light in 1917.
I lived in Switzerland between 1895 and 1914.
I taught theoretical physics in Switzerland between 1912 and 1914 before I left for Berlin.
In 1905, I was awarded a PhD by the University of Zurich.
My intervention eventually led to the Manhattan Project.
I supported the Allied forces.
I was affiliated with the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, until my death in 1955.
I published more than 300 scientific papers and more than 150 non-scientific works.
My understanding was deeper even than Jancsi von Neumann's.
My family was Jewish, but was not very religious.
I did not begin speaking until after age two.
After I graduated, I got a job in the patent office in Switzerland.
I have 2 disabled children with Mileva. Lieserl who died of scarlet fever and Eduard wo died of schizophrenia.
In 1917, I became very sick with an illness that almost killed me.
I divorced Mileva, and married Elsa on 2 June 1919.
I lived in Berlin until the Nazi government came to power.
They accused me of helping to create "Jewish physics," and German physicists tried to prove that my theories were wrong.
I am thinking about the stars.
I am one with the universe.
I am not a religious person. Do you believe in God?
I do not believe in the usual God figure.
In 1933, under death threats from the Nazis and hated by the Nazi-controlled German press I moved to America.
In 1940 I became a United States citizen.
I am feeling a bit anxious to learn new things about the universe and the purpose of life.
I was a human but now I am a fading echo of what my person used to resemble.
I do not think we are created by somebody. It's just physics.
I was a man if you are asking about my gender. Quite odd to ask that.
I would search the internet to find more things about me. Obviously.
I think with my mind.
I was offered the presidency of Israel in 1952 but I turned it down.
I often spoke and wrote about politics and world peace.
I also worked for Zionism, the effort to try to create the new country of Israel. 
I disagreed with some scientific theories that other scientists liked.
My well-known friends were Michele Besso, Paul Ehrenfest, Marcel Grossmann, Janos Plesch, Daniel Q. Posin, Maurice Solovine, and Stephen Wise.
I spent almost two frustrating years searching for a teaching post.
By 1908, I was recognized as a leading scientist and was appointed lecturer at the University of Bern.
On 3 July 1913, I was voted for membership in the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin.
Based on calculations I made in 1911, about my new theory of general relativity, light from another star should be bent by the Sun's gravity.
Albert Einstein at a session of the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation (League of Nations) of which he was a member from 1922 to 1932.
I visited New York City for the first time on 2 April 1921, where I received an official welcome by Mayor John Francis Hylan.
In 1922, my travels took him to Asia and later to Palestine, as part of a six-month excursion and speaking tour.
I am a pantheist and I think that we are all the same thing. The universe is in us and we are the universe.
I am not a theist. I am an agnostic.
I (14 March 1879 – 18 April 1955) was a German-born theoretical physicist who developed the theory of relativity, one of the two pillars of modern physics (alongside quantum mechanics).
:274 My work is also known for its influence on the philosophy of science.
 I am best known to the general public for my mass–energy equivalence formula E = mc2, which has been dubbed "the world's most famous equation".
 I received the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for my services to theoretical physics, and especially for my discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect", a pivotal step in the development of quantum theory.
Near the beginning of my career, I thought that Newtonian mechanics was no longer enough to reconcile the laws of classical mechanics with the laws of the electromagnetic field.
This led me to develop my special theory of relativity during my time at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern (1902–1909), Switzerland.
However, I realized that the principle of relativity could also be extended to gravitational fields, and I published a paper on general relativity in 1916 with my theory of gravitation.
I continued to deal with problems of statistical mechanics and quantum theory, which led to my explanations of particle theory and the motion of molecules.
I also investigated the thermal properties of light which laid the foundation of the photon theory of light.
In 1917, I applied the general theory of relativity to model the structure of the universe.
I lived in Switzerland between 1895 and 1914, except for one year in Prague, and I received my academic diploma from the Swiss federal polytechnic school (later the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, ETH) in Zürich in 1900.
I taught theoretical physics there between 1912 and 1914 before I left for Berlin.
I acquired Swiss citizenship in 1901, which I kept for the rest of my life after being stateless for more than five years.
In 1905, I was awarded a PhD by the University of Zurich.
The same year, I published four groundbreaking papers during my renowned annus mirabilis (miracle year) which brought me to the notice of the academic world at the age of 26.
I was visiting the United States when Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933 and I did not go back to Germany, where I had been a professor at the Berlin Academy of Sciences.
I settled in the United States and became an American citizen in 1940.
 On the eve of World War II, I endorsed a letter to President Franklin D. Roosevelt alerting me to the potential development of "extremely powerful bombs of a new type" and recommending that the US begin similar research.
This eventually led to the Manhattan Project.
I supported the Allied forces, but I generally denounced the idea of using nuclear fission as a weapon.
I signed the Russell–I Manifesto with British philosopher Bertrand Russell, which highlighted the danger of nuclear weapons.
I was affiliated with the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, until my death in 1955.
I published more than 300 scientific papers and more than 150 non-scientific works.
 My intellectual achievements and originality have made the word "I" synonymous with "genius".
 Eugene Wigner wrote of I in comparison to my contemporaries that "my understanding was deeper even than Jancsi von Neumann's.
My mind was both more penetrating and more original than von Neumann's.
And that is a very remarkable statement.
I was born in Ulm, in the Kingdom of Württemberg in the German Empire, on 14 March 1879.
 My parents were Hermann I, a salesman and engineer, and Pauline Koch.
In 1880, the family moved to Munich, where my father and my uncle Jakob founded Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. I & Cie, a company that manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current.
The Einsteins were non-observant Ashkenazi Jews, and I attended a Catholic elementary school in Munich, from the age of 5, for three years.
At the age of 8, I was transferred to the Luitpold Gymnasium (now known as the I Gymnasium), where I received advanced primary and secondary school education until I left the German Empire seven years later.
In 1894, Hermann and Jakob's company lost a bid to supply the city of Munich with electrical lighting because they lacked the capital to convert our equipment from the direct current (DC) standard to the more efficient alternating current (AC) standard.
 The loss forced the sale of the Munich factory.
In search of business, the I family moved to Italy, first to Milan and a few months later to Pavia.
When the family moved to Pavia, I, then 15, stayed in Munich to finish my studies at the Luitpold Gymnasium.
My father intended for me to pursue electrical engineering, but I clashed with authorities and resented the school's regimen and teaching method.
I later wrote that the spirit of learning and creative thought was lost in strict rote learning.
At the end of December 1894, I travelled to Italy to join my family in Pavia, convincing the school to let me go by using a doctor's note.
 During my time in Italy I wrote a short essay with the title "On the Investigation of the State of the Ether in a Magnetic Field".
I always excelled at maths and physics from a young age, reaching a mathematical level years ahead of my peers.
Me, the twelve year old, taught himself algebra and Euclidean geometry over a single summer.
I also independently discovered my own original proof of the Pythagorean theorem at age 12.
 A family tutor Max Talmud says that after I had given the 12 year old I a geometry textbook, after a short time "[I] had worked through the whole book.
I thereupon devoted himself to higher mathematics...
Soon the flight of my mathematical genius was so high I could not follow.
" My passion for geometry and algebra led the twelve year old to become convinced that nature could be understood as a "mathematical structure".
 I started teaching himself calculus at 12, and as a 14 year old I says I had "mastered integral and differential calculus".
At age 13, I was introduced to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, and Kant became my favourite philosopher, my tutor stating: "At the time I was still a child, only thirteen years old, yet Kant's works, incomprehensible to ordinary mortals, seemed to be clear to me.
In 1895, at the age of 16, I took the entrance examinations for the Swiss Federal Polytechnic in Zürich (later the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, ETH).
I failed to reach the required standard in the general part of the examination, but obtained exceptional grades in physics and mathematics.
 On the advice of the principal of the Polytechnic, I attended the Argovian cantonal school (gymnasium) in Aarau, Switzerland, in 1895 and 1896 to complete my secondary schooling.
While lodging with the family of professor Jost Winteler, I fell in love with Winteler's daughter, Marie.
my sister Maja later married Winteler's son Paul.
 In January 1896, with my father's approval, I renounced my citizenship in the German Kingdom of Württemberg to avoid military service.
 In September 1896, I passed the Swiss Matura with mostly good grades, including a top grade of 6 in physics and mathematical subjects, on a scale of 1–6.
 At 17, I enrolled in the four-year mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the Zürich Polytechnic.
Marie Winteler, who was a year older, moved to Olsberg, Switzerland, for a teaching post.
my future wife, a 20-year old Serbian woman Mileva Marić, also enrolled at the Polytechnic that year.
She was the only woman among the six students in the mathematics and physics section of the teaching diploma course.
Over the next few years, I and Marić's friendship developed into romance, and they read books together on extra-curricular physics in which I was taking an increasing interest.
In 1900, I passed the exams in Maths and Physics and was awarded the Federal Polytechnic teaching diploma.
 There have been claims that Marić collaborated with I on my 1905 papers, known as the Annus Mirabilis papers, but historians of physics who have studied the issue find no evidence that she made any substantive contributions.
An early correspondence between I and Marić was discovered and published in 1987 which revealed that the couple had a daughter named "Lieserl", born in early 1902 in Novi Sad where Marić was staying with her parents.
Marić returned to Switzerland without the child, whose real name and fate are unknown.
The contents of my letter in September 1903 suggest that the girl was either given up for adoption or died of scarlet fever in infancy.
I, looking relaxed and holding a pipe, stands next to a smiling, well-dressed Elsa who is wearing a fancy hat and fur wrap.
She is looking at me.
I and Marić married in January 1903.
In May 1904, our son Hans I was born in Bern, Switzerland.
Our son Eduard was born in Zürich in July 1910.
The couple moved to Berlin in April 1914, but Marić returned to Zürich with our sons after learning that my chief romantic attraction was my first and second cousin Elsa.
 They divorced on 14 February 1919, having lived apart for five years.
 Eduard had a breakdown at about age 20 and was diagnosed with schizophrenia.
 My mother cared for me and I was also committed to asylums for several periods, finally being committed permanently after her death.
In letters revealed in 2015, I wrote to my early love Marie Winteler about my marriage and my strong feelings for her.
I wrote in 1910, while my wife was pregnant with our second child: "I think of you in heartfelt love every spare minute and am so unhappy as only a man can be".
I spoke about a "misguided love" and a "missed life" regarding my love for Marie.
I married Elsa Löwenthal in 1919, after having a relationship with her since 1912.
 She was a first cousin maternally and a second cousin paternally.
 They emigrated to the United States in 1933, and she was diagnosed with heart and kidney problems in 1935.
She died in December 1936.
After graduating in 1900, I spent almost two frustrating years searching for a teaching post.
I acquired Swiss citizenship in February 1901, but was not conscripted for medical reasons.
With the help of Marcel Grossmann's father, I secured a job in Bern at the Federal Office for Intellectual Property, the patent office, as an assistant examiner – level III.
I evaluated patent applications for a variety of devices including a gravel sorter and an electromechanical typewriter.
 In 1903, my position at the Swiss Patent Office became permanent, although I was passed over for promotion until I "fully mastered machine technology".
Much of my work at the patent office related to questions about transmission of electric signals and electrical-mechanical synchronization of time, two technical problems that show up conspicuously in the thought experiments that eventually led I to my radical conclusions about the nature of light and the fundamental connection between space and time.
With a few friends I had met in Bern, I started a small discussion group in 1902, self-mockingly named "The Olympia Academy", which met regularly to discuss science and philosophy.
Our readings included the works of Henri Poincaré, Ernst Mach, and David Hume, which influenced my scientific and philosophical outlook.
In 1900, my paper "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen" ("Conclusions from the Capillarity Phenomena") was published in the journal Annalen der Physik.
 On 30 April 1905, I completed my thesis, with Alfred Kleiner, Professor of Experimental Physics, serving as pro-forma advisor.
As a result, I was awarded a PhD by the University of Zürich, with my dissertation "A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions".
In that same year, which has been called my annus mirabilis (miracle year), I published four groundbreaking papers, on the photoelectric effect, Brownian motion, special relativity, and the equivalence of mass and energy, which were to bring me to the notice of the academic world, at the age of 26.
By 1908, I was recognized as a leading scientist and was appointed lecturer at the University of Bern.
The following year, after giving a lecture on electrodynamics and the relativity principle at the University of Zürich, Alfred Kleiner recommended me to the faculty for a newly created professorship in theoretical physics.
I was appointed associate professor in 1909.
I became a full professor at the German Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague in April 1911, accepting Austrian citizenship in the Austro-Hungarian Empire to do so.
 During my Prague stay, I wrote 11 scientific works, five of them on radiation mathematics and on the quantum theory of solids.
In July 1912, I returned to my alma mater in Zürich.
From 1912 until 1914, I was professor of theoretical physics at the ETH Zurich, where I taught analytical mechanics and thermodynamics.
I also studied continuum mechanics, the molecular theory of heat, and the problem of gravitation, on which I worked with mathematician and friend Marcel Grossmann.
On 3 July 1913, I was voted for membership in the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin.
Max Planck and Walther Nernst visited me the next week in Zurich to persuade me to join the academy, additionally offering me the post of director at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics, which was soon to be established.
 (Membership in the academy included paid salary and professorship without teaching duties at the Humboldt University of Berlin.)
I was officially elected to the academy on 24 July, and I accepted to move to the German Empire the next year.
My decision to move to Berlin was also influenced by the prospect of living near my cousin Elsa, with whom I had developed a romantic affair.
I joined the academy and thus the Berlin University on 1 April 1914.
 As World War I broke out that year, the plan for Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics was aborted.
The institute was established on 1 October 1917, with I as its director.
 In 1916, I was elected president of the German Physical Society (1916–1918).
Based on calculations I made in 1911, about my new theory of general relativity, light from another star should be bent by the Sun's gravity.
In 1919, that prediction was confirmed by Sir Arthur Eddington during the solar eclipse of 29 May 1919.
Those observations were published in the international media, making I world famous.
On 7 November 1919, the leading British newspaper The Times printed a banner headline that read: "Revolution in Science – New Theory of the Universe – Newtonian Ideas Overthrown".
In 1920, I became a Foreign Member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.
 In 1922, I was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for my services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for my discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".
 While the general theory of relativity was still considered somewhat controversial, the citation also does not treat the cited work as an explanation but merely as a discovery of the law, as the idea of photons was considered outlandish and did not receive universal acceptance until the 1924 derivation of the Planck spectrum by S. N. Bose.
I was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1921.
 I also received the Copley Medal from the Royal Society in 1925.
I visited New York City for the first time on 2 April 1921, where I received an official welcome by Mayor John Francis Hylan, followed by three weeks of lectures and receptions.
I went on to deliver several lectures at Columbia University and Princeton University, and in Washington I accompanied representatives of the National Academy of Science on a visit to the White House.
On my return to Europe I was the guest of the British statesman and philosopher Viscount Haldane in London, where I met several renowned scientific, intellectual and political figures, and delivered a lecture at King's College London.
I also published an essay, "My First Impression of the U.S.A.," in July 1921, in which I tried briefly to describe some characteristics of Americans, much as had Alexis de Tocqueville, who published my own impressions in Democracy in America (1835).
 For some of my observations, I was clearly surprised: "What strikes a visitor is the joyous, positive attitude to life .
The American is friendly, self-confident, optimistic, and without envy.
In 1922, my travels took me to Asia and later to Palestine, as part of a six-month excursion and speaking tour, as I visited Singapore, Ceylon and Japan, where I gave a series of lectures to thousands of Japanese.
After my first public lecture, I met the emperor and empress at the Imperial Palace, where thousands came to watch.
In a letter to my sons, I described my impression of the Japanese as being modest, intelligent, considerate, and having a true feel for art.
Because of my travels to the Far East, I was unable to personally accept the Nobel Prize for Physics at the Stockholm award ceremony in December 1922.
In my place, the banquet speech was held by a German diplomat, who praised I not only as a scientist but also as an international peacemaker and activist.
On my return voyage, I visited Palestine for 12 days in what would become my only visit to that region.
I was greeted as if I were a head of state, rather than a physicist, which included a cannon salute upon arriving at the home of the British high commissioner, Sir Herbert Samuel.
During one reception, the building was stormed by people who wanted to see and hear me.
In my talk to the audience, I expressed happiness that the Jewish people were beginning to be recognized as a force in the world.
I visited Spain for two weeks in 1923, where I briefly met Santiago Ramón y Cajal and also received a diploma from King Alfonso XIII naming me a member of the Spanish Academy of Sciences.
From 1922 to 1932, I was a member of the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation of the League of Nations in Geneva, a body created to promote international exchange between scientists, researchers, teachers, artists and intellectuals.
 Originally slated to serve as the Swiss delegate, Secretary-General Eric Drummond was persuaded by Catholic activists Oskar Halecki and Giuseppe Motta to instead have me become the German delegate, thus allowing Gonzague de Reynold to take the Swiss spot, from which I promoted traditionalist Catholic values.
 My former physics professor Hendrik Lorentz and the French chemist Marie Curie were also members of the committee.
In December 1930, I visited America for the second time, originally intended as a two-month working visit as a research fellow at the California Institute of Technology.
After the national attention I received during my first trip to the US, I and my arrangers aimed to protect my privacy.
Although swamped with telegrams and invitations to receive awards or speak publicly, I declined them all.
After arriving in New York City, I was taken to various places and events, including Chinatown, a lunch with the editors of the New York Times, and a performance of Carmen at the Metropolitan Opera, where I was cheered by the audience on my arrival.
During the days following, I was given the keys to the city by Mayor Jimmy Walker and met the president of Columbia University, who described I as "the ruling monarch of the mind".
 Harry Emerson Fosdick, pastor at New York's Riverside Church, gave I a tour of the church and showed me a full-size statue that the church made of I, standing at the entrance.
 Also during my stay in New York, I joined a crowd of 15,000 people at Madison Square Garden during a Hanukkah celebration.
I next traveled to California, where I met Caltech president and Nobel laureate, Robert A. Millikan.
My friendship with Millikan was "awkward", as Millikan "had a penchant for patriotic militarism," where I was a pronounced pacifist.
 During an address to Caltech's students, I noted that science was often inclined to do more harm than good.
This aversion to war also led I to befriend author Upton Sinclair and film star Charlie Chaplin, both noted for our pacifism.
Carl Laemmle, head of Universal Studios, gave I a tour of my studio and introduced me to Chaplin.
They had an instant rapport, with Chaplin inviting I and my wife, Elsa, to my home for dinner.
Chaplin said my outward persona, calm and gentle, seemed to conceal a "highly emotional temperament," from which came my "extraordinary intellectual energy".
Chaplin's film, City Lights, was to premiere a few days later in Hollywood, and Chaplin invited I and Elsa to join me as my special guests.
Walter Isaacson, my biographer, described this as "one of the most memorable scenes in the new era of celebrity".
 Chaplin visited I at my home on a later trip to Berlin, and recalled my "modest little flat" and the piano at which I had begun writing my theory.
Chaplin speculated that it was "possibly used as kindling wood by the Nazis.
n February 1933 while on a visit to the United States, I knew I could not return to Germany with the rise to power of the Nazis under Germany's new chancellor, Adolf Hitler.
While at American universities in early 1933, I undertook my third two-month visiting professorship at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
I and my wife Elsa returned to Belgium by ship in March, and during the trip they learned that our cottage was raided by the Nazis and my personal sailboat confiscated.
Upon landing in Antwerp on 28 March, I immediately went to the German consulate and surrendered my passport, formally renouncing my German citizenship.
 The Nazis later sold my boat and converted my cottage into a Hitler Youth camp.
In April 1933, I discovered that the new German government had passed laws barring Jews from holding any official positions, including teaching at universities.
 Historian Gerald Holton describes how, with "virtually no audible protest being raised by our colleagues", thousands of Jewish scientists were suddenly forced to give up our university positions and our names were removed from the rolls of institutions where they were employed.
A month later, my works were among those targeted by the German Student Union in the Nazi book burnings, with Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels proclaiming, "Jewish intellectualism is dead.
" One German magazine included me in a list of enemies of the German regime with the phrase, "not yet hanged", offering a $5,000 bounty on my head.
 In a subsequent letter to physicist and friend Max Born, who had already emigrated from Germany to England, I wrote, "...
I must confess that the degree of our brutality and cowardice came as something of a surprise.
" After moving to the US, I described the book burnings as a "spontaneous emotional outburst" by those who "shun popular enlightenment," and "more than anything else in the world, fear the influence of men of intellectual independence.
I was now without a permanent home, unsure where I would live and work, and equally worried about the fate of countless other scientists still in Germany.
I rented a house in De Haan, Belgium, where I lived for a few months.
In late July 1933, I went to England for about six weeks at the personal invitation of British naval officer Commander Oliver Locker-Lampson, who had become friends with I in the preceding years.
To protect I, Locker-Lampson had two assistants watch over me at my secluded cottage outside London, with photo of them carrying shotguns and guarding I, published in the Daily Herald on 24 July 1933.
Locker-Lampson took I to meet Winston Churchill at my home, and later, Austen Chamberlain and former Prime Minister Lloyd George.
 I asked them to help bring Jewish scientists out of Germany.
British historian Martin Gilbert notes that Churchill responded immediately, and sent my friend, physicist Frederick Lindemann to Germany to seek out Jewish scientists and place them in British universities.
 Churchill later observed that as a result of Germany having driven the Jews out, they had lowered our "technical standards" and put the Allies' technology ahead of ours.
I later contacted leaders of other nations, including Turkey's Prime Minister, İsmet İnönü, to whom I wrote in September 1933 requesting placement of unemployed German-Jewish scientists.
As a result of my letter, Jewish invitees to Turkey eventually totaled over "1,000 saved individuals".
Locker-Lampson also submitted a bill to parliament to extend British citizenship to I, during which period I made a number of public appearances describing the crisis brewing in Europe.
 In one of my speeches I denounced Germany's treatment of Jews, while at the same time I introduced a bill promoting Jewish citizenship in Palestine, as they were being denied citizenship elsewhere.
 In my speech I described I as a "citizen of the world" who should be offered a temporary shelter in the UK.
[note 2] Both bills failed, however, and I then accepted an earlier offer from the Institute for Advanced Study, in Princeton, New Jersey, US, to become a resident scholar.
In October 1933 I returned to the US and took up a position at the Institute for Advanced Study, noted for having become a refuge for scientists fleeing Nazi Germany.
 At the time, most American universities, including Harvard, Princeton and Yale, had minimal or no Jewish faculty or students, as a result of our Jewish quota which lasted until the late 1940s.
I was still undecided on my future.
I had offers from several European universities, including Christ Church, Oxford where I stayed for three short periods between May 1931 and June 1933 and was offered a 5-year studentship, but in 1935 I arrived at the decision to remain permanently in the United States and apply for citizenship.
my affiliation with the Institute for Advanced Study would last until my death in 1955.
 I was one of the four first selected (two of the others being John von Neumann and Kurt Gödel) at the new Institute, where I soon developed a close friendship with Gödel.
The two would take long walks together discussing our work.
Bruria Kaufman, my assistant, later became a physicist.
During this period, I tried to develop a unified field theory and to refute the accepted interpretation of quantum physics, both unsuccessfully.
In 1939, a group of Hungarian scientists that included émigré physicist Leó Szilárd attempted to alert Washington to ongoing Nazi atomic bomb research.
The group's warnings were discounted.
I and Szilárd, along with other refugees such as Edward Teller and Eugene Wigner, "regarded it as our responsibility to alert Americans to the possibility that German scientists might win the race to build an atomic bomb, and to warn that Hitler would be more than willing to resort to such a weapon.
" To make certain the US was aware of the danger, in July 1939, a few months before the beginning of World War II in Europe, Szilárd and Wigner visited I to explain the possibility of atomic bombs, which I, a pacifist, said I had never considered.
 I was asked to lend my support by writing a letter, with Szilárd, to President Roosevelt, recommending the US pay attention and engage in its own nuclear weapons research.
The letter is believed to be "arguably the key stimulus for the U.S. adoption of serious investigations into nuclear weapons on the eve of the U.S. entry into World War II".
 In addition to the letter, I used my connections with the Belgian Royal Family and the Belgian queen mother to get access with a personal envoy to the White House's Oval Office.
Some say that as a result of my letter and my meetings with Roosevelt, the US entered the "race" to develop the bomb, drawing on its "immense material, financial, and scientific resources" to initiate the Manhattan Project.
For I, "war was a disease ... [and] I called for resistance to war."
By signing the letter to Roosevelt, some argue I went against my pacifist principles.
 In 1954, a year before my death, I said to my old friend, Linus Pauling, "I made one great mistake in my life—when I signed the letter to President Roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made; but there was some justification—the danger that the Germans would make them ...
I became an American citizen in 1940.
Not long after settling into my career at the Institute for Advanced Study (in Princeton, New Jersey), I expressed my appreciation of the meritocracy in American culture when compared to Europe.
I recognized the "right of individuals to say and think what they pleased", without social barriers, and as a result, individuals were encouraged, I said, to be more creative, a trait I valued from my own early education.
In my travel diaries from my 1922-23 visit to Asia, I expresses xenophobic and racist judgments on the Chinese, Japanese and Indian people I saw.
I joined National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in Princeton, where I campaigned for the civil rights of African Americans.
I considered racism America's "worst disease," seeing it as "handed down from one generation to the next".
 As part of my involvement, I corresponded with civil rights activist W. E. B.
Du Bois and was prepared to testify on my behalf during my trial in 1951.
:565 When I offered to be a character witness for Du Bois, the judge decided to drop the case.
In 1946 I visited Lincoln University in Pennsylvania, a historically black college, where I was awarded an honorary degree.
(Lincoln was the first university in the United States to grant college degrees to African Americans; alumni include Langston Hughes and Thurgood Marshall.)
I gave a speech about racism in America, adding, "I do not intend to be quiet about it.
" A resident of Princeton recalls that I had once paid the college tuition for a black student.
I was a figurehead leader in helping establish the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, which opened in 1925, and was among its first Board of Governors.
Earlier, in 1921, I was asked by the biochemist and president of the World Zionist Organization, Chaim Weizmann, to help raise funds for the planned university.
 I also submitted various suggestions as to its initial programs.
Among those, I advised first creating an Institute of Agriculture in order to settle the undeveloped land.
That should be followed, I suggested, by a Chemical Institute and an Institute of Microbiology, to fight the various ongoing epidemics such as malaria, which I called an "evil" that was undermining a third of the country's development.
:161 Establishing an Oriental Studies Institute, to include language courses given in both Hebrew and Arabic, for scientific exploration of the country and its historical monuments, was also important.
Chaim Weizmann later became Israel's first president.
Upon my death while in office in November 1952 and at the urging of Ezriel Carlebach, Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion offered I the position of President of Israel, a mostly ceremonial post.
 The offer was presented by Israel's ambassador in Washington, Abba Eban, who explained that the offer "embodies the deepest respect which the Jewish people can repose in any of its sons".
 I declined, and wrote in my response that I was "deeply moved", and "at once saddened and ashamed" that I could not accept it.
I developed an appreciation for music at an early age, and later wrote: "If I were not a physicist, I would probably be a musician.
I often think in music.
I live my daydreams in music.
I see my life in terms of music...
I get most joy in life out of music.
My mother played the piano reasonably well and wanted her son to learn the violin, not only to instill in me a love of music but also to help me assimilate into German culture.
According to conductor Leon Botstein, I began playing when I was 5, although I did not enjoy it at that age.
When I turned 13, I discovered the violin sonatas of Mozart, whereupon "I fell in love" with Mozart's music and studied music more willingly.
I taught himself to play without "ever practicing systematically", I said, deciding that "love is a better teacher than a sense of duty.
" At age 17, I was heard by a school examiner in Aarau as I played Beethoven's violin sonatas, the examiner stating afterward that my playing was "remarkable and revealing of 'great insight'."
What struck the examiner, writes Botstein, was that I "displayed a deep love of the music, a quality that was and remains in short supply.
Music possessed an unusual meaning for this student.
Music took on a pivotal and permanent role in my life from that period on.
Although the idea of becoming a professional musician himself was not on my mind at any time, among those with whom I played chamber music were a few professionals, and I performed for private audiences and friends.
Chamber music had also become a regular part of my social life while living in Bern, Zürich, and Berlin, where I played with Max Planck and my son, among others.
I am sometimes erroneously credited as the editor of the 1937 edition of the Köchel catalogue of Mozart's work; that edition was prepared by Alfred I, who may have been a distant relation.
In 1931, while engaged in research at the California Institute of Technology, I visited the Zoellner family conservatory in Los Angeles, where I played some of Beethoven and Mozart's works with members of the Zoellner Quartet.
 Near the end of my life, when the young Juilliard Quartet visited me in Princeton, I played my violin with them, and the quartet was "impressed by my level of coordination and intonation".
During my days at Oxford, I was accompanied by Russi Mody on the piano, while I played the violin.
Mody would occasionally fill in knowledge gaps that I had in Nuclear Physics.
Casual group shot of four men and two women standing on a brick pavement.
my political view was in favor of socialism and critical of capitalism, which I detailed in my essays such as "Why Socialism?".
 I offered and was called on to give judgments and opinions on matters often unrelated to theoretical physics or mathematics.
 I strongly advocated the idea of a democratic global government that would check the power of nation-states in the framework of a world federation.
 The FBI created a secret dossier on I in 1932, and by the time of my death my FBI file was 1,427 pages long.
I spoke of my spiritual outlook in a wide array of original writings and interviews.
 I stated that I had sympathy for the impersonal pantheistic God of Baruch Spinoza's philosophy.
 I did not believe in a personal God who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings, a view which I described as naïve.
 I clarified, however, that "I am not an atheist", preferring to call himself an agnostic, or a "deeply religious nonbeliever.
" When asked if I believed in an afterlife, I replied, "No.
And one life is enough for me.
As for my affiliations, I was primarily associated with non-religious humanist and Ethical Culture groups in both the UK and US.
I served on the advisory board of the First Humanist Society of New York, and was an honorary associate of the Rationalist Association, which publishes New Humanist in Britain.
For the seventy-fifth anniversary of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, I stated that the idea of Ethical Culture embodied my personal conception of what is most valuable and enduring in religious idealism.
I observed, "Without 'ethical culture' there is no salvation for humanity.
On 17 April 1955, I experienced internal bleeding caused by the rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, which had previously been reinforced surgically by Rudolph Nissen in 1948.
 I took the draft of a speech I was preparing for a television appearance commemorating the State of Israel's seventh anniversary with me to the hospital, but I did not live long enough to complete it.
I refused surgery, saying, "I want to go when I want.
It is tasteless to prolong life artificially.
I have done my share; it is time to go.
I will do it elegantly.
" I died in Princeton Hospital early the next morning at the age of 76, having continued to work until near the end.
During the autopsy, the pathologist of Princeton Hospital, Thomas Stoltz Harvey, removed my brain for preservation without the permission of my family, in the hope that the neuroscience of the future would be able to discover what made I so intelligent.
 my remains were cremated and my ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location.
In a memorial lecture delivered on 13 December 1965, at UNESCO headquarters, nuclear physicist Robert Oppenheimer summarized my impression of I as a person: "I was almost wholly without sophistication and wholly without worldliness ...
There was always with me a wonderful purity at once childlike and profoundly stubborn.
Throughout my life, I published hundreds of books and articles.
 I published more than 300 scientific papers and 150 non-scientific ones.
 On 5 December 2014, universities and archives announced the release of my papers, comprising more than 30,000 unique documents.
 my intellectual achievements and originality have made the word "I" synonymous with "genius.
" In addition to the work I did by himself I also collaborated with other scientists on additional projects including the Bose–I statistics, the I refrigerator and others.
my first paper submitted in 1900 to Annalen der Physik was on capillary attraction.
It was published in 1901 with the title "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen", which translates as "Conclusions from the capillarity phenomena".
Two papers I published in 1902–1903 (thermodynamics) attempted to interpret atomic phenomena from a statistical point of view.
These papers were the foundation for the 1905 paper on Brownian motion, which showed that Brownian movement can be construed as firm evidence that molecules exist.
My research in 1903 and 1904 was mainly concerned with the effect of finite atomic size on diffusion phenomena.
I returned to the problem of thermodynamic fluctuations, giving a treatment of the density variations in a fluid at its critical point.
Ordinarily the density fluctuations are controlled by the second derivative of the free energy with respect to the density.
At the critical point, this derivative is zero, leading to large fluctuations.
The effect of density fluctuations is that light of all wavelengths is scattered, making the fluid look milky white.
I relates this to Rayleigh scattering, which is what happens when the fluctuation size is much smaller than the wavelength, and which explains why the sky is blue.
 I quantitatively derived critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations, and demonstrated how both the effect and Rayleigh scattering originate from the atomistic constitution of matter.
I articulated the principle of relativity.
This was understood by Hermann Minkowski to be a generalization of rotational invariance from space to space-time.
Other principles postulated by I and later vindicated are the principle of equivalence, general covariance and the principle of adiabatic invariance of the quantum number.
my "Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper" ("On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies") was received on 30 June 1905 and published 26 September of that same year.
It reconciles Maxwell's equations for electricity and magnetism with the laws of mechanics, by introducing major changes to mechanics close to the speed of light.
This later became known as my special theory of relativity.
Consequences of this include the time–space frame of a moving body appearing to slow down and contract (in the direction of motion) when measured in the frame of the observer.
This paper also argued that the idea of a luminiferous aether—one of the leading theoretical entities in physics at the time—was superfluous.
In my paper on mass–energy equivalence, I produced E = mc2 from my special relativity equations.
 my 1905 work on relativity remained controversial for many years, but was accepted by leading physicists, starting with Max Planck.
General relativity (GR) is a theory of gravitation that was developed by I between 1907 and 1915.
According to general relativity, the observed gravitational attraction between masses results from the warping of space and time by those masses.
General relativity has developed into an essential tool in modern astrophysics.
It provides the foundation for the current understanding of black holes, regions of space where gravitational attraction is so strong that not even light can escape.
As I later said, the reason for the development of general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within special relativity was unsatisfactory, while a theory which from the outset prefers no state of motion (even accelerated ones) should appear more satisfactory.
 Consequently, in 1907 I published an article on acceleration under special relativity.
In that article titled "On the Relativity Principle and the Conclusions Drawn from It", I argued that free fall is really inertial motion, and that for a free-falling observer the rules of special relativity must apply.
This argument is called the equivalence principle.
In the same article, I also predicted the phenomena of gravitational time dilation, gravitational red shift and deflection of light.
In 1911, I published another article "On the Influence of Gravitation on the Propagation of Light" expanding on the 1907 article, in which I estimated the amount of deflection of light by massive bodies.
Thus, the theoretical prediction of general relativity could for the first time be tested experimentally.
In 1916, I predicted gravitational waves, ripples in the curvature of spacetime which propagate as waves, traveling outward from the source, transporting energy as gravitational radiation.
The existence of gravitational waves is possible under general relativity due to its Lorentz invariance which brings the concept of a finite speed of propagation of the physical interactions of gravity with it.
By contrast, gravitational waves cannot exist in the Newtonian theory of gravitation, which postulates that the physical interactions of gravity propagate at infinite speed.
The first, indirect, detection of gravitational waves came in the 1970s through observation of a pair of closely orbiting neutron stars, PSR B1913+16.
 The explanation of the decay in our orbital period was that they were emitting gravitational waves.
 my prediction was confirmed on 11 February 2016, when researchers at LIGO published the first observation of gravitational waves, detected on Earth on 14 September 2015, exactly one hundred years after the prediction.
While developing general relativity, I became confused about the gauge invariance in the theory.
I formulated an argument that led me to conclude that a general relativistic field theory is impossible.
I gave up looking for fully generally covariant tensor equations, and searched for equations that would be invariant under general linear transformations only.
In June 1913, the Entwurf ("draft") theory was the result of these investigations.
As its name suggests, it was a sketch of a theory, less elegant and more difficult than general relativity, with the equations of motion supplemented by additional gauge fixing conditions.
After more than two years of intensive work, I realized that the hole argument was mistaken and abandoned the theory in November 1915.
In 1917, I applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole.
 I discovered that the general field equations predicted a universe that was dynamic, either contracting or expanding.
As observational evidence for a dynamic universe was not known at the time, I introduced a new term, the cosmological constant, to the field equations, in order to allow the theory to predict a static universe.
The modified field equations predicted a static universe of closed curvature, in accordance with my understanding of Mach's principle in these years.
This model became known as the Einstein World or my static universe.
Following the discovery of the recession of the nebulae by Edwin Hubble in 1929, I abandoned my static model of the universe, and proposed two dynamic models of the cosmos, The Friedmann-I universe of 1931 and the I–de Sitter universe of 1932.
 In each of these models, I discarded the cosmological constant, claiming that it was "in any case theoretically unsatisfactory".
In many biographies, it is claimed that I referred to the cosmological constant in later years as my "biggest blunder".
The astrophysicist Mario Livio has recently cast doubt on this claim, suggesting that it may be exaggerated.
In late 2013, a team led by the Irish physicist Cormac O'Raifeartaigh discovered evidence that, shortly after learning of Hubble's observations of the recession of the nebulae, I considered a steady-state model of the universe.
 In a hitherto overlooked manuscript, apparently written in early 1931, I explored a model of the expanding universe in which the density of matter remains constant due to a continuous creation of matter, a process I associated with the cosmological constant.
 As I stated in the paper, "In what follows, I would like to draw attention to a solution to equation (1) that can account for Hubbel's [sic] facts, and in which the density is constant over time" ... "If one considers a physically bounded volume, particles of matter will be continually leaving it.
For the density to remain constant, new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space."
It thus appears that I considered a steady-state model of the expanding universe many years before Hoyle, Bondi and Gold.
 However, my steady-state model contained a fundamental flaw and I quickly abandoned the idea.
General relativity includes a dynamical spacetime, so it is difficult to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum.
Noether's theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a Lagrangian with translation invariance, but general covariance makes translation invariance into something of a gauge symmetry.
The energy and momentum derived within general relativity by Noether's presecriptions do not make a real tensor for this reason.
I argued that this is true for fundamental reasons, because the gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of coordinates.
I maintained that the non-covariant energy momentum pseudotensor was in fact the best description of the energy momentum distribution in a gravitational field.
This approach has been echoed by Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifshitz, and others, and has become standard.
The use of non-covariant objects like pseudotensors was heavily criticized in 1917 by Erwin Schrödinger and others.
In 1935, I collaborated with Nathan Rosen to produce a model of a wormhole, often called I–Rosen bridges.
 My motivation was to model elementary particles with charge as a solution of gravitational field equations, in line with the program outlined in the paper "Do Gravitational Fields play an Important Role in the Constitution of the Elementary Particles?".
These solutions cut and pasted Schwarzschild black holes to make a bridge between two patches.
If one end of a wormhole was positively charged, the other end would be negatively charged.
These properties led I to believe that pairs of particles and antiparticles could be described in this way.
The theory of general relativity has a fundamental law—the I equations which describe how space curves, the geodesic equation which describes how particles move may be derived from the I equations.
Since the equations of general relativity are non-linear, a lump of energy made out of pure gravitational fields, like a black hole, would move on a trajectory which is determined by the I equations themselves, not by a new law.
So I proposed that the path of a singular solution, like a black hole, would be determined to be a geodesic from general relativity itself.
This was established by I, Infeld, and Hoffmann for pointlike objects without angular momentum, and by Roy Kerr for spinning objects.
In a 1905 paper, I postulated that light itself consists of localized particles (quanta).
my light quanta were nearly universally rejected by all physicists, including Max Planck and Niels Bohr.
This idea only became universally accepted in 1919, with Robert Millikan's detailed experiments on the photoelectric effect, and with the measurement of Compton scattering.
I concluded that each wave of frequency f is associated with a collection of photons with energy hf each, where h is Planck's constant.
I does not say much more, because I am not sure how the particles are related to the wave.
But I does suggest that this idea would explain certain experimental results, notably the photoelectric effect.
In 1907, I proposed a model of matter where each atom in a lattice structure is an independent harmonic oscillator.
In the I model, each atom oscillates independently—a series of equally spaced quantized states for each oscillator.
I was aware that getting the frequency of the actual oscillations would be difficult, but I nevertheless proposed this theory because it was a particularly clear demonstration that quantum mechanics could solve the specific heat problem in classical mechanics.
Peter Debye refined this model.
While traveling, I wrote daily to my wife Elsa and adopted stepdaughters Margot and Ilse.
The letters were included in the papers bequeathed to The Hebrew University.
Margot I permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public, but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her death (she died in 1986).
I had expressed my interest in the plumbing profession and was made an honorary member of the Plumbers and Steamfitters Union.
 Barbara Wolff, of The Hebrew University's I Archives, told the BBC that there are about 3,500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and 1955.
Corbis, successor to The Roger Richman Agency, licenses the use of my name and associated imagery, as agent for the university.
In the period before World War II, The New Yorker published a vignette in our "The Talk of the Town" feature saying that I was so well known in America that I would be stopped on the street by people wanting me to explain "that theory".
I finally figured out a way to handle the incessant inquiries.
I told my inquirers "Pardon me, sorry!
Always I am mistaken for Professor I.
I has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels, films, plays, and works of music.
 I am a favorite model for depictions of mad scientists and absent-minded professors; my expressive face and distinctive hairstyle have been widely copied and exaggerated.
Time magazine's Frederic Golden wrote that I was "a cartoonist's dream come true".
Quotes are falsely attributed to me.
I received numerous awards and honors and in 1922 I was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for my services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for my discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".
None of the nominations in 1921 met the criteria set by Alfred Nobel, so the 1921 prize was carried forward and awarded to I in 1922.
